Sweet, so let's talk a little
bit about invalid values,
because there's a few gotchas here, so
this is the same code we've seen before.
We have a declaration that sets
the background to red and a button
a declaration that sets it to whatever
accent color is orange as a fallback.
What happens if accent color is
42 degrees is set to 42 degrees,
which is a perfectly valid CSS value for
another property.
But when it's substituted in background,
then it produces
an invalid background because background
42 degrees is nonsensical, so
what do you think will happen there?
What color will we get,
will we get red, will we get orange,
will we get something else, black,
transparent like what's your guess?
>> Red.
>> So it most definitely will not be
red because by the time the browser
reads the second declaration it has
already thrown away the first one.
>> Why?
>> Now, it's, so it's actually gonna be
transparent but many people expect that
it should be orange, I mean,
the fallback is orange so why not?
The thing is the fallback is applied
when we don't have a value or
when the variable is set to initial which
is equivalent to not having a value.
When we do have a value,
like 42 is a legit value for the variable,
at that point, since we have a value,
the fallback is not applied,
the browser substitutes accent
color with the value we have.
Like, we might be having other
verticals in the same property as well,
the browser won't know if
the resulting value is valid,
until it's done substituting
all of these vital functions.
And if the resulting value is not
valid at the end of this process,
then the browser's like,
okay, what do I do now?
And what it ends up doing is basically
setting the property to whatever
it would have been if you
assigned it the unset keyword.
And for those of you that haven't
seen the unset keyword before,
it's basically equivalent to initial for
known inherited properties and inherit,
for inherited properties.
So it basically resets the property as
much as it can without knowing anything
specific about the property,
so for backgrounds,
the initial values having a transparent
background which is what we get.
This is very different from having
invalid values without variables,
before variables, before variables
if we had background red and
then background 42 degrees,
we would get red.
That is the reasonable behavior, but for
technical reasons, it was not feasible for
CSS, the variables are substituted
after the CSS code has been parsed.
So we don't actually have access
to the first declaration,
the background read that declaration, so
the browser needed to figure out something
else something else that it could do.
This concept is called invalid that
computed value time we're gonna be seeing
it throughout it's a very
important concept, it's not,
it's often abbreviated
in CSS circles as IACVT.
I'm just gonna say invalidate
computed value time when we say this,
cuz this is just a really weird acronym.
So what is a computed value,
there are three main stages in resolving
a CSS value, they're actually more,
but these are the three main ones,
first, there is parse time.
There is when the browser reads, the
specified values as they've been provided,
this is when the browser
goes through the CSS code.
Reads it, pauses it, creates an abstract
syntax tree, creates a tree of objects,
the CSS object model, this is basically
a one-and-done operation, it's done once.
It does not re-done when dimensions
change, when the windows or
is resized it's just done once
when the CSS code changes.
CSS code is repurposed only when
the actual CSS code changes like when we
override the style element for example,
and in most cases, it's only done once.
For example, this is when duplicate
properties in the same rule are removed
and this is when shortcut properties
are expanded to their long hands.
Then there is computed values which is
when most relative values are resolved but
not completely.
There are certain relative values
that are only resolved later
because they require expensive operations.
So for example, this is when relative
units will be resolved to pixels for
example viewport units.
But percentage widths will not be
resolved at computed value time they
will be resolved at what
we say used value time.
Because that's an expensive operation, the
browser leaves it as late as possible and
there's certain things that are done
as late as used value time.
For example, currentcolor is also
resolved then, many people think that
currentcolor is resolved at computed
value time, the currentcolor keyword.
But it's actually only resolved at used
value time, the main distinction that
we're gonna make in this workshop is
parse time versus computed value time.
Remember when earlier, we said that the
syntax of registered properties is checked
at computed value time and
not parse value time.
And that is why we cannot test for at
properties support via feature queries and
it was a bit hand wavy at the time
now you know what that means.
And another thing to remember is that
invalid computed value time is essentially
equivalent to the onset keyword
that is the end result of this.
Anytime a property becomes
invalid computed value time,
it's essentially set to unset,
let's look at another example.
So here,
we have a slightly different example but
it's still setting
the background to red and
then setting it to accent-color
with a fullback of 42 degrees.
So when accent color is not set or
when it's set to initial, what do we get?
>> Three people said transparent like
right after people said red and white,
any guesses,
looks like someone's guessing transparent.
>> The people who guessed
transparent are correct,
the reason we get transparent
is let's take it step by step.
So obviously, we won't get background
red that's thrown away at parts
time that's gone we'll never see it again,
now,
accent color has the value initial so
the full back is triggered.
So we get background 42 degrees and
since at that point,
all we have is a declaration with
background 42 degrees which is invalid.
It has to become invalid computed value
time which gives us the same as unset
which for
background gives us transparency.
So one thing to remember is that fallbacks
can also trigger invalid computed value
time, basically anytime as a result
of variables the browser ends
up with a declaration
that doesn't make sense.
That triggers invalid
computed value time and
this concept was actually introduced
when we designed CSS variables.
But in the future we plan to use it for
other things as well like for example,
in the future, we want to make it possible
to divide values and calc with lengths.
And this might be an avenue to
make it happen, in the previously,
it wasn't possible because of
potential division by zero.
So let's look at some more examples, you,
I'm not sure if you've
heard of LCH colors, so
HSL colors have a bunch of drawbacks
even though they're more human friendly.
The same difference in HSL coordinates can
produce callers with vastly different,
actual color differences, whereas LCH
is designed to be perceptually uniform.
So it doesn't have this problem, and
also LCH can access the entire
gamut of colors in a modern screen.
Whereas HSL colors are restricted to sRGB,
which in today's
screen is like two thirds of
the colors that the screen can produce.
So right now, only Safari supports LCH
colors, so what happens if we try to do
both, if we try to use LCH colors with
some standard CSS color fullback?
So as you probably know,
all of these code snippets would produce
the intended LCH color when
LCH is actually supported.
But when LCH is not supported,
they can produce different results, so
the first bit of code you probably
know what that would produce.
It would produce gold when LCH
is not supported that is what
we've been doing for fullbacks for
decades of using CSS.
So now with custom properties,
it's very common to define global
colors on custom properties,
so what happens if we wanna use LCH
colors, what happens in that case?
So you might be able to guess that
if a browser doesn't understand LCH,
then once it substitutes it into
the background declaration.
It sees an invalid value and
this results in an invalid computed value
time declaration which
makes it transparent.
In the third code example, this actually
produces the exact same result,
it doesn't help, for that,
the cascade happens in the color property.
Because the color property at this point,
the browser doesn't know that this
can only contain colors, it just sees two
declarations for the same custom property.
So it throws away the first one,
it gets the second one,
then tries to substitute it in
background and sees that it's not valid.
Here's another example,
what do you think this might produce, so
we've actually registered our code,
our color property here and
we've said it has to be,
it can only contain colors.
We've given it an initial value of sky
blue, which is probably not a very good
initial value for properties in general,
but here let's see what's going on.
And then we've assigned
a gold color on it,
which every browser understands and
the, and in the same rule.
We've assigned an LCH color on it,
which only safari understands,
so that, what will happen in other
browsers that are not Safari?
>> Sky blue.
>> That's clever, indeed, it's going to
be sky blue but why does this happen?
The reason this happens is that the
property that actually goes into invalid
computed value time mode is not
background now, it's the color property.
So, when we try to assign the LCH
value on the color property,
the browser sees that this is not valid.
And it sees this not at parse time because
as we've said, the syntax of registered
properties is only check that computed
value time, at parse time anything goes.
So then this property becomes
invalid at computed value time and
when a property becomes invalid at
computed value time it goes to its
initial value, which is, sky blue.
So some people might wonder, why did we
end up with this behavior, it's a little
bit unintuitive, why do custom properties
check their syntax at computed value time?
And not at parse time like real CSS
properties that the browser supports, so
the reason for
this is actually with a bit technical.
It's that register new properties which
could happen at any time would trigger
a reparse of the entire stylesheet.
Like you could add an add property
rule through JavaScript or
you could call CSS register property and
then you would trigger a reparse
of the entire style sheet.
If these would check the parse value time,
which is,
in parsing an entire style sheet
is a very expensive operation.
So we did not wanna introduce
a to performance foot gun, and
this is why their syntax is
checked at computed value time,
this is definitely something to remember.
It can be quite confusing,
what's going on if you don't know
that their syntax is checked that
computed value time and not parse time.
Many people assume that it should be
checked at parse time cuz that's what's
reasonable.